PR: Workshop for Spyder plugin development (#276)
spyder-ide/spyder-docs: doc/workshops/plugin-development.rst

.. _PyQt: https://www.riverbankcomputing.com/static/Docs/PyQt5/
.. _PySide: https://doc.qt.io/qtforpython-5/index.html
.. _Tutorials Point - PyQt tutorial: https://www.tutorialspoint.com/pyqt/index.htm
.. _Real Python - PyQt entries: https://realpython.com/search?q=pyqt
.. _Guru99 - PyQt tutorial: https://www.guru99.com/pyqt-tutorial.html
.. _Python GUIs - PyQt and PySide tutorials: https://www.pythonguis.com/

==============
Learning Goals
==============

By the end of this workshop participants will know:

* The basics to develop plugins for Spyder, and get a general idea of its inner workings.
* What types of plugins can be developed with Spyder.
* The structure of a plugin and the functionality of each component and how it connects to Spyder to extend its features.
* How to package and publish our plugin so that it can be easily installed and used by others.

=====================
Spyder for developers
=====================

The best place to find information about contributing to Spyder or developing for Spyder is its Github repository, in particular the `contribution guide`_.

.. image:: images/workshop-3/pd_spyder_ide.png
   :alt: Spyder IDE components.

> * The core of **Spyder** is `spyder-ide`_, a desktop application developed in *Qt*, which requires for its operation two packages with it is closely related (and without which it cannot work): *spyder-kernels* and *python-lsp-server*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The core of **Spyder** is `spyder-ide`_, a desktop application developed in *Qt*, which requires for its operation two packages with which it is closely related (and without which it cannot work): *spyder-kernels* and *python-lsp-server*.
```

* `Qt`_ is an open source multiplatform widget toolkit for creating native graphical user interfaces. Qt is a very complete development framework that offers utilities for building applications, and has extensions for Networking, Bluetooth, Charts, 3D rendering, Navigation (as GPS), among others.

* Spyder uses `qtpy`_ which is an abstraction layer that allows you to work with Qt from Python regardless of whether you use either of the two reference libraries: PyQt or PySide.

> * `spyder-kernels`_ provide Jupyter kernels to Spyder, for use within its consoles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `spyder-kernels`_ provides Jupyter kernels to Spyder, for use within its consoles.
```

* `pyls-spyder`_ which provides ``python-lsp-server`` extensions specifically designed for Spyder.

  * And `python-lsp-server`_ is a python implementation of the Microsoft Language Server Protocol in which we actively participate. ``python-lsp-server`` connects to an Editor to provide features such as autocomplete, go to definition, find all references, etc.

.. important::

>    These three packages: ``spyder-ide``, ``qtpy`` and ``pyls-spyder`` have been developed entirely by us, consolidating a huge effort over the years, and a way to secure Spyder's future by making it a robust and versatile tool.

Reviewer: Im conflicted a bit about this sentence since it seems unnecessary for the workshop and it seems a bit like we were bragging about these packages.

Spyder is currently developed in such a way that most of its features are implemented as plugins.

.. note::

>    In this workshop we will focus on the development of ``spyder-ide`` plugins on the main application window. That is to say, the features related to ``qtpy``, and with the Spyder components that make use of Qt. Therefore, the fundamental concepts of Qt operation must be understood.

Reviewer: Agree

.. _Version control with git: https://swcarpentry.github.io/git-novice/
.. _repository creation: https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/create-a-repo
.. _hello world: https://guides.github.com/activities/hello-world/

=========================================
Types of plugins we can develop in Spyder
=========================================

.. image:: images/workshop-3/pd_spyder_plugins.png
   :alt: Types of Spyder plugins.

Formally, plugins are instances of Qt classes that modify the behavior of Spyder.
Aside from a few fundamental components, most of Spyder's functionality arises from the interaction of plugins of two types:

SpyderDockablePlugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is a plugin that works as a ``QDockWidget``, this is a QT class that provides a graphical control that can be docked inside a ``QMainWindow`` or floated as a top-level window on the desktop.

SpyderPluginV2
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``SpyderPluginV2`` is a plugin that does not create a new dock widget on Spyder's main window. In fact, ``SpyderPluginV2`` is the parent class of ``SpyderDockablePlugin``.

> .. note:: ``SpyderPluginV2`` will be renamed to ``SpyderPlugin`` once the migration to the new API is finished

Reviewer: Not sure we should leave this note. @ccordoba12 thoughts?

Discovering Spyder-IDE plugins
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. topic:: ``SpyderDockablePlugin``

   If we look at the Spyder interface we can find a number of different panes on the right side (with the Spyder Default Window Layout), such as *Help*, *Variable Explorer*, *Plots*, *Files* and *History*.

>    * Each of these panels is a ``SpyderDockablePlugin`` that offers an *Undock* option by clicking the hamburger menu button in the upper right corner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * Each of these panes is a ``SpyderDockablePlugin`` that offers an *Undock* option by clicking the hamburger menu button in the upper right corner.
```
Let's try to be consistent with the wording.

* ``confpage.py``: this is where you specify the forms that will be displayed in Tools > Preferences so that the user can adjust the configurable parameters of our plugin.

=========================
Building our first plugin
=========================

From now on we will be building the plugin step by step, in the `spyder pomodoro timer repository`_ you will find the final version of the code for you to review it as a reference, or in case we are missing any detail.

.. _spyder pomodoro timer repository: https://github.com/map0logo/spyder-pomodoro-timer

Widgets
~~~~~~~

Best is going backwards to build our plugin, let's start by implementing the graphical controls of our plugin in ``widgets.py``

Originally `v0.0.1dev`_, we have:

.. code-block:: python

   # Spyder imports
   from spyder.api.config.decorators import on_conf_change
   from spyder.api.translations import get_translation

   from spyder.api.widgets.mixins import SpyderWidgetMixin

   # Localization
   _ = get_translation("spyder_pomodoro_timer.spyder")

.. hint::

>    The preset imports are a guide to what we will need in our plugin. The ``on_conf_change`` decorator will allow us to propagate the changes in the configuration. ``get_translation`` help us to generate the translation strings and ``SpyderWidgetMixin`` adds to any Widget the attributes and methods needed to integrate with Spyder (icon, style, translation, actions and extra options).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The preset imports are a guide to what we will need in our plugin. The ``on_conf_change`` decorator will allow us to propagate the changes in the configuration. ``get_translation`` helps us to generate the translation strings and ``SpyderWidgetMixin`` adds to any Widget the attributes and methods needed to integrate with Spyder (icon, style, translation, actions and extra options).
```

Since we want a widget that is periodically updated showing the pomodoro countdown, we will use a ``BaseTimerStatus`` instance.

So, we can safely substitute

.. code-block:: python

   from spyder.api.widgets.mixins import SpyderWidgetMixin

with

.. code-block:: python

   from spyder.api.widgets.status import BaseTimerStatus
   from spyder.utils.icon_manager import ima

Add an initial import:

.. code-block:: python

   # Third party imports
   import qtawesome as qta

And add at the end of the file:

.. code-block:: python

   class PomodoroTimerStatus(BaseTimerStatus):
       """Status bar widget to display the pomodoro timer"""

       ID = "pomodoro_timer_status"
       CONF_SECTION = "spyder_pomodoro_timer"

       def __init__(self, parent):
           super().__init__(parent)
           self.value = "25:00"

       def get_tooltip(self):
           """Override api method."""
           return "I am the Pomodoro timer!"

       def get_icon(self):
           return qta.icon("mdi.av-timer", color=ima.MAIN_FG_COLOR)

.. hint::

    Spyder needs ``ID`` and ``CONF_SECTION`` to be defined, the constructor calls the parent class constructor and initializes the label ``value``.

> We add a tooltip to verify the existence of our plugin. Since Spyder uses ``qtawesome`` (is another of our projects that eases the incorporation of iconic fonts into Qt GUIs) we can select our icon using ``qta-browser`` from the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We add a tooltip to verify the existence of our plugin. Since Spyder uses ``qtawesome`` (another of our projects that eases the incorporation of iconic fonts into Qt GUIs) we can select our icon using ``qta-browser`` from the terminal.
```

   class PomodoroMenuSections:
       Main = "main_section"

So, we are telling the rest of Spyder, and our own plugin, that we are going to work on a new section of the toolbar called "pomodoro_timer". This section will consist of a button containing a menu (with a single section "main_section") with the actions: "start_timer", "pause_timer" and "stop_timer", to start, pause and stop (resetting) our timer respectively.

Note that these are simple class definitions with class fields, to ease the encapsulation and exchange of this information in a readable fashion.

Add actions to the toolbar
--------------------------

`v0.0.3dev-v0.0.4dev container.py diff`_

.. _v0.0.3dev-v0.0.4dev container.py diff: https://github.com/map0logo/spyder-pomodoro-timer/compare/v0.0.3-dev0...v0.0.4-dev0#diff-cd6991f5ce0c63fdcbdc3ae3f5d9ac1f685ebc59c5517d5208e85ff30e3da050

Now, let's go to ``container.py`` where we are going to implement the behavior of the new toolbar actions.
In this case, where we are not going to specify the internal behavior of our plugin, but the relationship with widgets in other areas of Spyder it is more convenient to do it in the container.

> As we did with ``PomodoroTimerStatus``, we are going to use ``qtawesome`` icons, for this purpose let's add at the beginning of the imports:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we did with ``PomodoroTimerStatus``, we are going to use ``qtawesome`` icons. For this purpose let's add at the beginning of the imports:
```

These methods simply manipulate the ``pause`` field of ``pomodoro_timer_status``, and in the case of ``stop_pomodoro_timer`` the countdown is restarted.

Register the toolbar
--------------------

`v0.0.3dev-v0.0.4dev plugin.py diff`_

.. _v0.0.3dev-v0.0.4dev plugin.py diff: https://github.com/map0logo/spyder-pomodoro-timer/compare/v0.0.3-dev0...v0.0.4-dev0#diff-1e1feff1c9cd8690a64077ba61b59db060cae1212f9da8ce0522d3e027d09b0d

A final mandatory step is to go to ``plugin.py`` and register this new toolbar component.

To do this, add ``Plugins.Toolbar`` into our plugin requirements:

.. code-block:: python

       REQUIRES = [Plugins.StatusBar, Plugins.Toolbar]

And connect the toolbar we have created in the container to the spyder toolbar.

.. code-block:: python

       @on_plugin_available(plugin=Plugins.Toolbar)
       def on_toolbar_available(self):
           container = self.get_container()
           toolbar = self.get_plugin(Plugins.Toolbar)
           toolbar.add_application_toolbar(container.pomodoro_timer_toolbar)

Review the changes
------------------

The first thing we can notice is that we already have the corresponding buttons in the toolbar.

> .. image:: images/pd_toolbar_buttons.gif

Reviewer: This gif is not working.

   :alt: Pomodoro timer toolbar buttons

The strings that were entered as the ``tip`` parameter in the creation of the actions are shown here as the tooltips of the buttons.

Also, if we check the menu "View > Toolbars", we find that there is a new option under a separator: "Pomodoro Timer Toolbar".

.. image:: images/workshop-3/pd_view_pomodoro_toolbar.png
   :alt: View > Toolbars menu with "Pomodoro Timer Toolbar" option.

These integrations that streamline the user experience of the components added by the new plugin with the rest of Spyder happen thanks to mixins that are added to Spyder's own Widgets. Consider this when adding custom widgets.

Finally, let's check how the new Pomodoro Timer control buttons in the toolbar interact with the component in the status bar.

> .. image:: images/pd_toolbar_statusbar_interact.gif

Reviewer: This gif is not working for me

This corresponds to the usual code for user interfaces based on Qt widgets, in this case the section of our parameters corresponds to a ``QGroupBox``, where the parameters are organized vertically using a ``QVBoxLayout``, and each parameter corresponds to a ``QGridLayout`` where Labels and inputs are distributed (in this case a ``QSpinBox``).

Spyder provides some helper functions to facilitate the work, for instance, ``create_spinbox`` which allows to instantiate and initialize in a single step the widgets corresponding preffix an suffix labels together with the spinbox.

Propagate configuration changes
-------------------------------

Since we moved all the configuration information to ``conf.py``, now we have to import it from there into ``widgets.py``.

`v0.0.4dev-v0.0.5dev widgets.py diff`_

.. _v0.0.4dev-v0.0.5dev widgets.py diff: https://github.com/map0logo/spyder-pomodoro-timer/compare/v0.0.4-dev0...v0.0.5-dev0#diff-f156d182eb57c9fa20d1ca4b9677d13b158447c04f90724d936bb77a50df31bc

.. code-block:: python

   # Local imports
   from spyder_pomodoro_timer.spyder.config import (
       CONF_SECTION,
       CONF_DEFAULTS,
       CONF_VERSION,
   )

> Once we have the form ready, we can access the configuration value from anywhere in our plugin using the ``get_conf`` method, in this case we use it to access the value of the configurable parameter ``pomodoro_limit`` from the configuration instead of the constant ``POMODORO_DEFAULT``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we can access the configuration options from anywhere in our plugin using the ``get_conf`` method. In this case we use it to access the value of ``pomodoro_limit`` from the configuration instead of the constant ``POMODORO_DEFAULT``.
```

.. code-block:: python

           self.pomodoro_limit = self.get_conf(
               "pomodoro_limit"
           )

> Now we can add a method that updates our configurable parameter ``pomodoro_limit``. The ``@on_conf_change`` decorator is the one in charge of capturing the signal that is generated when applying the change of a specific configuration parameter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we can add a method that updates our configurable parameter ``pomodoro_limit``. The ``@on_conf_change`` decorator is the one in charge of capturing the signal that is generated when applying the change of a specific option.
```

.. code-block:: python

       @on_conf_change(option="pomodoro_limit")
       def set_pomodoro_limit(self, value):
           self.pomodoro_limit = int(value) * 1000 * 60
           self.countdown = self.pomodoro_limit
           self.value = self.display_time()

Registering preferences
-----------------------

> Finally, it is necessary to activate the use of the preferences from ``plugin.py``, including the preferences as a requirement,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, it is necessary to activate the use of preferences in ``plugin.py``, by requiring the Preferences plugin
```

`v0.0.4dev-v0.0.5dev plugin.py diff`_

.. _v0.0.4dev-v0.0.5dev plugin.py diff: https://github.com/map0logo/spyder-pomodoro-timer/compare/v0.0.4-dev0...v0.0.5-dev0#diff-1e1feff1c9cd8690a64077ba61b59db060cae1212f9da8ce0522d3e027d09b0d

.. code-block:: python

   class SpyderPomodoroTimer(SpyderPluginV2):
       ...
       REQUIRES = [Plugins.Preferences, Plugins.StatusBar, Plugins.Toolbar]

> and registering them in a method with the decorator ``@on_plugin_available``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and registering our plugin in a method with the decorator ``@on_plugin_available``.
```

.. code-block:: python

       @on_plugin_available(plugin=Plugins.Preferences)
       def on_preferences_available(self):
           preferences = self.get_plugin(Plugins.Preferences)
           preferences.register_plugin_preferences(self)

> Now we can access the Preferences window either from the toolbar or from the "Tools > Preferences" menu and we will find a section *Spyder Pomodoro Timer* and inside it is the *Pomodoro timer limit* parameter, if we change the value and apply the change we will see how the corresponding label in the status bar changes.

Reviewer: Please add a screenshot to illustrate this part.

> Now we can access the Preferences window either from the toolbar or from the "Tools > Preferences" menu and we will find a section *Spyder Pomodoro Timer* and inside it is the *Pomodoro timer limit* parameter, if we change the value and apply the change we will see how the corresponding label in the status bar changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we can access the Preferences window either from the toolbar or from the "Tools > Preferences" menu. There we will find a section called *Spyder Pomodoro Timer* and inside it is the *Pomodoro timer limit* parameter. If we change that value, we will see how the corresponding label in the status bar changes.
```

> Now your plugin is in an initial version ready to publish...

Reviewer: Maybe it is worth having a final screenshot with all the elements you added to spyder with this plugin pointed out.

- Generate the basic structure of a Spyder plugin using Cookiecutter.
- Understand the file structure of a Spyder plugin.
- Add and register Qt widgets in the Spyder status bar.
- Install our plugin in development mode.
- Add and register Qt widgets in the Spyder toolbar.
- Add a menu with actions in the toolbar.
- Add configurable parameters to our plugin that appear in the preferences window.
- Edit the description and classifiers to the installable package of our plugin.
- Publish our plugin to TestPyPI and PyPI.

With these skills we hope to ease the way for you to develop your own Spyder plugins.

If you have ideas for plugin development feel free to contact us through the `Spyder-IDE`_ Github organization space.

If you are interested in an introduction to scientific computing with Spyder, you can visit the workshop :doc:`Scientific Computing and Visualization with Spyder <../workshops/scientific-computing>`.

If you are interested in an introduction to financial analysis with Spyder, you can visit the workshop :doc:`Financial Data Analysis with Spyder<../workshops/financial>`.

.. _Spyder-IDE: https://github.com/spyder-ide

Homework
~~~~~~~~

> As you may have noticed, there were some features left to implement such as the to-do list, notifications for the completions of the pomodoros, and tracking of long and short break periods. Try to implement these additional features and do not hesitate to contact us if you have any doubts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you may have noticed, there were some features left to implement such as notifications when pomodoros are completed. Try to implement them and do not hesitate to contact us if you have any doubts.
```

===============
Further reading
===============

In the `plugin-examples`_ repository you can find additional examples that will surely be useful for you to further understand Spyder plugin development.

> A more in-depth review of the Spyder repository itself, especially its simpler components such as history, graphs or working directory may help you understand it better. As well as a review of the various help functions, sample configuration pages, widgets and mixins are sure to be helpful.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A more in-depth review of the Spyder repository itself, especially its simpler plugins, such as History, Plots or Working directory, may help you understand it better. As well as a review of the various helper functions, widgets and mixins present in ``spyder.api``.
```

> Any of the Qt tutorials mentioned at the beginning of the workshop will be helpful.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Plugin Development with Spyder
##############################

============

> Introduction

Author: Done

============

> This workshop consists of a review of the features and possibilities of the API offered by Spyder 5, the recently released version of our favorite IDE for scientific python, to develop plugins to extend its functionality.

Author: done

As a practical exercise, we will develop a pair of simple plugins that incorporate a configurable pomodoro timer in the status bar and a task manager as a dockable widget.

By the end of this workshop participants will know the basics to develop plugins for Spyder, and get a general idea of its inner workings. We will review what types of plugins can be developed with Spyder, the structure of a plugin, the functionality of each component and how it connects to Spyder to extend its features. Finally, we will learn how to package and publish our plugin so that it can be easily installed and used by others.

> Spyder for developers

Author: Done

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The best place to understand the process and technologies that make up spyder is its Github repository, in particular the `contribution guide`_.

> The core of **Spyder** is `spyder-ide`_, a desktop application developed in *Qt*, which requires for its operation two packages with it is closely related (and without which it cannot work): *spyder-kernels* and *spyder-lsp-server*.

Author: As I see it, the idea is that in the future, when both the editor and the console are implemented as plugins, the only component of Spyder that we will not be able to disable, and therefore would become the core, is spyder-ide.

These three packages: ``spyder-ide``, ``qtpy`` and ``pyls-spyder`` have been developed entirely by the Spyder team, consolidating a huge effort over the years, and a way to secure Spyder's future by making it a robust and versatile tool.

In turn, spyder-ide is currently developed in such a way that most of its features are implemented as extensions or plugins to allow third-party developers to extend its functionality.
In this workshop we will focus on the development of ``spyder-ide`` plugins on the main application window. That is to say, the features related to ``qtpy``, and with the Spyder components that make use of Qt. Therefore, the fundamental concepts of Qt operation must be understood.

.. _contribution guide: https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md
.. _qtpy: https://github.com/spyder-ide/qtpy
.. _spyder-ide: https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder
.. _spyder-kernels: https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder-kernels
.. _pyls-spyder: https://github.com/spyder-ide/pyls-spyder
.. _python-lsp-server: https://github.com/python-lsp/python-lsp-server

================================

> Set up a development environment

Reviewer: This wasn't moved. What do you think @ccordoba12 ?

================================

> In principle, we could use any Spyder installed within a new conda environment according to the instructions given in the installation guide: https://docs.spyder-ide.org/5/installation.html

Author: Done

However, if it is a working environment that has other dependencies and you want to keep your plugin development independent of them, it is recommended to create a new environment which only have Spyder with the minimum dependencies needed for your plugin.

We can install it in the following way:

.. code-block:: bash

>    $ conda config --add channels conda-forge

Author: Done

   $ conda config --set channel_priority strict
   $ conda create -n spyder-ide python=3

>    $ conda activate spyder-ide

Author: Changed to "spyder-dev".

   $ conda install mamba # A personal recommendation
   $ mamba install spyder

> The following concepts can be reviewed while the packages are being installed.

Author: The idea is to advance in the review of the concepts while installing spyder and its dependencies.

===================
Create a repository
===================

Now that we have our local virtual environment, it is good practice to manage our source code with a version control system, and the most widely used web service for this purpose is currently Github. Here you can find, for example, the Spyder and Python repositories.

> * Log in to your github account.

Author: Rather, I chose to add a link to the official Github documentation.

* Click on the "New repository" option in the "+" menu at the top right next to your profile picture.
* A dialog will appear where you can insert the repository name and some basic options, e.g. to initialize the repository with README or license files.
* Click the “Create repository” button.
* In the main window of the recently created repository, click on the green "Code" button an copy the clone link.

> * In your local command line run ``$ git clone [repo-link]``. You must have git installed and configured on your computer, if you don't have experience using git we recommend The Carpentries workshop `Version control with git`_.

Author: The Carpentries Git tutorial is based on Github, but I also added a link to a Github tutorial.

.. _Version control with git: https://swcarpentry.github.io/git-novice/

=========================================
Types of plugins we can develop in Spyder
=========================================

Formally, plugins are instances of Qt classes that modify the behavior of Spyder.
Aside from a few fundamental components, most of Spyder's functionality arises from the interaction of plugins. There are two types of plugins available:

SpyderDockablePlugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> It is a plugin that works as a ``QDockWidget``, this is a QT class that provides a graphical control that can be docked inside a ``QMainWindow`` or floated as a top-level window on the desktop.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is a plugin that works as a ``QDockWidget``, this is a Qt class that provides a graphical control that can be docked inside a ``QMainWindow`` or floated as a top-level window on the desktop.
```

- Small correction.
- I also agree with @juanis2112's comment above: links are missing.

Choosing to use a Pomodoro Timer can help to give a task your full, undivided attention.

The typical process of the Pomodoro Technique consists of the following six
steps:

1. Choose a task to be done.
2. Set the Pomodoro Timer (default is 25 minutes).
3. Work only on that task until the timer ends.
4. When the timer rings, put a checkmark on a piece of paper, this is called "a pomodoro".
5. If you have less than 3 checkmarks take a short break (by default, 5 minutes), and return to step 2.
6. When you have completed four Pomodoro cycles, you deserve a longer break (our default is 15 minutes). Checkmarks are reset to zero, go back to step 1.

.. _Pomodoro Technique: https://francescocirillo.com/pages/pomodoro-technique

Steps
~~~~~

* Select the most suitable plugin type and create its initial structure using cookie-cutter.
* Install the plugin in development mode in the virtual environment from which we run Spyder.
* Implement the functionality of our plugin using the Spyder classes and following the guidelines indicated in the plugin structure.
* Build a configuration form for our plugin, which would appear in Tools > Preferences.

Features
~~~~~~~~

> A minimal planning to organize ideas.

Reviewer: Im still missing the drawing

  * If it is a ``SpyderDockablePlugin`` you should set a field named ``WIDGET_CLASS`` with an instance of ``PluginMainWidget`` (that internally it is assigned to ``CONTAINER_CLASS``).

* ``container.py``: only used for ``SpyderPluginV2`` plugins, in this file we create the instance of ``PluginMainContainer`` that we are going to assign to the base class of our plugin.

* ``widgets.py``: in this file is where the graphical components of our plugin are written, if it is of type ``SpyderPluginV2`` and it does not have elements in the interface it is not necessary.
  In this file we create the instance of ``PluginMainWidget`` that we are going to assign to the base class of our ``SpyderDockablePlugin`` plugin, or to our instance of ``PluginMainContainer`` in case our plugin is of type ``SpyderPluginV2``.

* ``confpage.py``: this is where you specify the forms that will be displayed in Tools > Preferences so that the user can adjust the configurable parameters of our plugin.

=========================
Building our first plugin
=========================

Widgets
~~~~~~~

> Best is going backwards to build our plugin, let's start by implementing the graphical controls of our plugin in ``widgets.py``

Reviewer: This sentence is not very clear

Originally, we have:

.. code-block:: python

   # Spyder imports
   from spyder.api.config.decorators import on_conf_change
   from spyder.api.translations import get_translation

   from spyder.api.widgets.mixins import SpyderWidgetMixin

   # Localization
   _ = get_translation("spyder_pomodoro_timer.spyder")

The preset imports are a guide to what we will need in our plugin. The ``on_conf_change`` decorator will allow us to propagate the changes in the configuration. ``get_translation`` help us to generate the translation strings and ``SpyderWidgetMixin`` adds to any Widget the attributes and methods needed to integrate with Spyder (icon, style, translation, actions and extra options).

> After some research in the Spyder source code we can find that in Spyder there are two types of predefined components for the status bar:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When taking a look at the Spyder source code we can find that in Spyder there are two types of predefined components for the status bar:
```
Not sure why to mention the research

Since we want a widget that is periodically updated showing the pomodoro countdown, we will use a ``BaseTimerStatus`` instance.

So, we can safely substitute

.. code-block:: python

   from spyder.api.widgets.mixins import SpyderWidgetMixin

with

.. code-block:: python

   from spyder.api.widgets.status import BaseTimerStatus
   from spyder.utils.icon_manager import ima

Add an initial import:

.. code-block:: python

   # Third party imports
   import qtawesome as qta

And add at the end of the file:

.. code-block:: python

   class PomodoroTimerStatus(BaseTimerStatus):
       """Status bar widget to display the pomodoro timer"""

       ID = "pomodoro_timer_status"
       CONF_SECTION = "pomodoro_timer"

       def __init__(self, parent):
           super().__init__(parent)
           self.value = "25:00"

       def get_tooltip(self):
           """Override api method."""
           return "I am the Pomodoro tooltip"

       def get_icon(self):
           return qta.icon("mdi.av-timer", color=ima.MAIN_FG_COLOR)

Spyder needs ``ID`` and ``CONF_SECTION`` to be defined, the constructor calls the parent class constructor and initializes the label ``value``.

> We add a tooltip to verify the existence of our plugin. Since Spyder uses ``qtawesome`` (is another spyder team project which makes it easy incorporate iconic fonts into our interface) we can select our icon using ``qta-browser`` from the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We add a tooltip to verify the existence of our plugin. Since Spyder uses ``qtawesome`` (a project which makes it easy incorporate iconic fonts into our interface) we can select our icon using ``qta-browser`` from the terminal.
```
Add link to the qtawesome repo

.. code-block:: bash

   (spyder-ide) $ qta-browser

From here we can select and copy the name of the icon of our preference.

.. image:: images/pd_qta-browser_timer.png
   :alt: qta browser dialog

At the end of ``widgets.py`` we add:

.. code-block:: python

   # ---- BaseTimerStatus API
   def get_value(self):
       """Get current time of the timer"""

       return self.value

> Since BaseTimerStatus requires this method to be implemented to update its content every time it is requested by the internal timer.

Reviewer: Missing gui label

           print('SpyderPomodoroTimer registered!')

So, basically, Spyder is aware of the presence of our plugin, and that this plugin adds a new widget to the status bar.

At the end of ``plugin.py`` we add the following:

.. code-block:: python

   @property
   def pomodoro_timer_status(self):
       container = self.get_container()
       return container.pomodoro_timer_status

In this way, ``SpyderPomodoroTimer`` can access ``pomodoro_timer_status`` of ``SpyderPomodoroTimerContainer`` as if it were its own property.

In summary, we have been doing the following:

.. image:: images/pd_plugin_structure.png
   :alt: Basic structure of Pomodoro Timer Spyder plugin.

We have created a widget, then we add the widget to the container, from there we register the container in the plugin next to the status bar. In the plugin, we accessed the widget and inserted it into the status bar.

The use of the container is necessary because Qt requires our widget to be inside another widget before using it (otherwise it would become a floating window). And through the container that is derived from ``SpyderWidgetMixin`` and ``SpyderToolbarMixin`` mixins it gets integrated to the rest of Spyder.

> ======================

Reviewer: I would add a link on top of this to the "solutions" code for people to see how their code should be looking like

Author: Done, I added the link to the repository.

> How to test our plugin

Reviewer: Not sure this part should be here. At first when reading it I thought that we were done with the plugin.

Author: Thanks, I moved it to the top where the plugin structure is explained.

Let's implement ``update_timer`` at the end of the file:

.. code-block:: python

       def display_time(self, time):
           """Remaining time in minutes:seconds format."""

           minutes = int((time / (1000 * 60)) % 60)
           seconds = int((time / 1000) % 60)
           return f"{minutes:02d}:{seconds:02d}"

       def update_timer(self):
           """Updates the countdown until it reaches zero."""

           remaining_time = self.display_time(self.countdown)

           if remaining_time == "00:00":
               self.value = remaining_time
           else:
               # Update the current timer by decreasing the current running time by one second
               self.countdown -= 1000
               self.value = remaining_time

Here we rely on the ``display_time`` method that converts the current ``countdown`` value, which is measured in milliseconds, into a human-readable format.

And ``update_timer`` simply keeps updating the countdown until we reach zero.

If we run Spyder again we will find that our timer has come to life.

.. image:: images/pd_timer_countdown.gif
   :alt: Timer countdown working.

Timer controls
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Now we need a way to control our timer. It may not be the best option, but we can add some buttons to the toolbar to show how to add controls and actions to Spyder.

Reviewer: Not sure why we need to mention that it may not be the best option.

Author: In this case the idea was to leave these plugin design considerations as homework for the participants. 
It is not the best option, but perhaps the simplest and the one that serves to illustrate how to add buttons to the toolbar.

       def start_pomodoro_timer(self):
           """Start the timer."""
           self.pomodoro_timer_status.pause = False

       def pause_pomodoro_timer(self):
           """Pause the timer."""
           self.pomodoro_timer_status.pause = True

       def stop_pomodoro_timer(self):
           """Stop the timer."""
           self.pomodoro_timer_status.pause = True
           self.pomodoro_timer_status.countdown = self.pomodoro_timer_status.pomodoro_limit

These methods simply manipulate the ``pause`` field of ``pomodoro_timer_status``, and in the case of ``stop_pomodoro_timer`` the countdown is restarted.

Register the toolbar
--------------------

A final mandatory step is to go to ``plugin.py`` and register this new toolbar component.

To do this, add ``Plugins.Toolbar`` into our plugin requirements:

.. code-block:: python

       REQUIRES = [Plugins.StatusBar, Plugins.Toolbar]

And connect the toolbar we have created in the container to the spyder toolbar.

.. code-block:: python

           toolbar = self.get_plugin(Plugins.Toolbar)
           toolbar.add_application_toolbar(container.pomodoro_timer_toolbar)

Review the changes
------------------

> Something that has not been mentioned is that every time we make a change to our code we must restart Spyder so that the plugin is reloaded and we can review the changes.

Reviewer: Probably best to mention this in the "How to test our plugin part"

Author: Moved to the end of "How to test our plugin part" section.

The first thing we can notice is that we already have the corresponding buttons in the toolbar.

.. image:: images/pd_toolbar_buttons.gif
   :alt: Pomodoro timer toolbar buttons

The strings that were entered as the ``tip`` parameter in the creation of the actions are shown here as the tooltips of the buttons.

Also, if we check the menu "View > Toolbars", we find that there is a new option under a separator: "Pomodoro Timer Toolbar".

.. image:: images/pd_view_pomodoro_toolbar.png
   :alt: View > Toolbars menu with "Pomodoro Timer Toolbar" option.

These integrations that streamline the user experience of the components added by the new plugin with the rest of Spyder happen thanks to mixins that are added to Spyder's own Widgets. Consider this when adding custom widgets.

Finally, let's check how the new Pomodoro Timer control buttons in the toolbar interact with the component in the status bar.

.. image:: images/pd_toolbar_statusbar_interact.gif
   :alt: Interaction between the Pomodoro Timer toolbar and its status bar.

> We can notice that there is a small delay of 2 seconds, this is because the time between each timer update is one second. We can improve this response time by explicitly restarting the timer.

Reviewer: At the end of this section say something like "Now your plugin is ready to publish..." so that it doesn't seem like it was cut.

Author: Done
